# About

Big Tech’s Dominance: An Empirical Investigation Into the Role of Personal Data Accumulation on Big Tech’s High Market Shares in the Digital Economy.



## Libraries Used
* Pandas
* Itertools
* Matplotlib
* SciPy
* Numpy


## Methodology
The analysis focuses on Alphabet and their competitors within six digital markets. These are: search engines, browsers, social media, digital mapping, email clients and music streaming. Including multiple markets captures the effects of each variable on the digital economy, rather than on just one digital market in which some effects may be stronger and thus would be overemphasised in our results (Haucap and Heimeshoff, 2014). These specific markets were chosen because they are the ones most often referenced in the literature, and because low data availability made including other markets infeasible. 

All five Big Tech companies dominate multiple digital markets and rely on personal data as a necessary input. Nuances between the companies exist but are largely irrelevant to our research question. Indeed, despite considerable differences between Amazon’s e-commerce business, Alphabet’s internet search services and Meta’s social networking sites, the companies are grouped together in the literature because of their shared focus on personal data and their dominant positions in the digital economy (Birch et al., 2021; Moore and Tambini, 2021). The main differences between Big Tech are with regards to the markets within which they operate, and this is already accounted for by the inclusion of multiple digital markets. Indeed, including Alphabet’s competitors means that all of Big Tech are accounted for in our results because they all compete with Alphabet in at least one market. More broadly, Yin (2003) argues that case studies are appropriate for studying contemporary topics, for which the digital economy qualifies. 


## Data
The privacy policies listed on each company’s website were a vital data source. GDPR requires that companies inform users of the types of data that they collect (Information Commissioner’s Office, 2018). Using this I created an index of personal data categories to record the data each company collects. Privacy policies are expected to be reliable because firms are liable to fines of up to 4% of their total global turnover if they breach users’ right to be informed (Information Commissioner’s Office, 2018). Nonetheless each privacy policy was cross-checked to add further robustness to the data. The sources used for this were also made available by GDPR. That is, the right to download the data a company has collected about you (Information Commissioner’s Office, 2018). This data has been excluded from the paper for privacy reasons, however, the data that each platform held about me was found to be largely consistent with the reporting in their privacy policies. Some inconsistencies existed only where an application had not collected a data point that they typically do according to their privacy policy. This is easily explained, as platforms can only collect data they are given access to. For example, I have not purchased the premium services offered by YouTube, so they have not collected my payment information. In these instances the privacy policy was chosen as the preferred source of information. The final data was a count of the number of categories of data that each company collects. One potential limitation of this is that it attributes equal value to all forms of personal data. Further detail on the categories of personal data considered can be found in appendix B. 

The second dataset I collected and compiled was to assess SE. I read through company investor reports and recorded whether they offered a product within each digital market. One difficulty with this is that the distinction between digital markets is often blurred (Porter and Heppelmann, 2014). For example, YouTube is not typically considered a social media, yet Facebook consider YouTube a competitor because a reduction in the time spent on one service is correlated with an increase in the time spent on the other (Bowles, 2020). The distinction between some digital markets may therefore be unclear. Nonetheless, the wide range of markets  mitigates the impact of a particular service being deemed as part of one digital market where it could be included in another. Furthermore, the final data type was a count of the number of digital markets that each company operated in, so services were accounted for equally regardless of the market they compete in. For greater detail, the list of digital markets considered is shown in appendix D. 

To account for default coverage I created a dichotomous dataset. I recorded 1 if a firm had default positions for 10% or more of the market, and 0 if they did not. The basis for placing search engines and browsers within one of these categories was a report by the CMA (2020c). For other services I used the market share of Android (Alphabet) and iOS (Apple) to categorise them (Statcounter, 2022a). This was viable because iOS and Android market shares are so dominant that services which come pre-installed on either OS surpass the 10% threshold. Similarly, Windows’ dominance as a desktop OS meant that pre-installed Microsoft services such as Edge also qualified as default services (Statcounter, 2022d; Statista, 2022c). 

The remaining two independent variables, DNE and EOS, were measured using downloads and app ratings respectively. Downloads for the last month were taken from SensorTower (2022a; 2022b), with the exception of default Apple apps. These apps are automatically downloaded on all iPhones but are not available to download on other devices. As such, the number of downloads is equivalent to the number of iPhones purchased each month according to Apple’s (2021) annual report. EOS in digital markets occur for a rising number of users. The initial plan was therefore to model EOS using monthly active user (MAU) data. However, not all companies publish their MAU which led to data availability issues. Another proxy which can be used to measure the number of users is the number of app ratings (Bondaronek et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2015). The appropriateness of this measure was strengthened by its Pearson correlation coefficient of 0.86 with the available MAU data. The app ratings were compiled for each app from Apple’s App Store and Google’s Play Store, which constitute the main method of accessing each digital service (Roma and Ragaglia, 2016). Again, the number of citations required to include the ratings for each app is impractical, but these sources can be identified in the list of references. 

Finally, the data for our dependent variable, market share, was sourced from Statcounter (2022b; 2022c; 2022e) for three digital markets: search engines, browsers and social media. Market share data for email, music streaming and digital mapping was sourced from Statista (2021a), Midia (2021) and Verto (2021) respectively. These sources were chosen for their robust methodology. For example, Statcounter’s tracking code is installed in over 2 million websites across a range of geographies (Statcounter, 2022f). The data is also adjusted to remove bot activity and therefore offers an accurate representation of global market share. Each source’s robust methodology makes them sufficiently interchangeable, however it is worth noting that the most appropriate measure of market share differs for distinct digital markets. For example, data on paid subscribers more accurately reflects market share for music streaming services whilst search engine data can be computed from the number of page referrals. This difference in methodology is not expected to have a notable impact on results.  


## Summary of Results
[A full analysis and summary of results can be found here](https://github.com/bendsouza2/dissertation-analysis/blob/master/Written%20Dissertation.docx)

